Good afternoon,
and welcome to the 5:00 session
here on Friday afternoon,
the last session of WWDC.
My name is Matthew Formica.
I am,
as many of you I'm sure already know,
am the Cocoa and
Development Tools evangelist
here at Apple Computer.
And this is the one session of
the week where I actually get to
present some technical content,
as opposed to just hosting Q&A.
So with that said, let's get started.
So one of the things in developer
relations that we've noticed as
we work with all of you on various
applications is that the low levels
of the operating system have a big
impact on application performance.
In fact, a lot of times,
the launch time of an application
or how it performs has a lot
to do with the dynamic linker,
DYLD, and how the application is linked
together statically as well.
And these pieces of the operating system
are often less well understood than
some of the other API sets in the OS.
and David Koehn.
On top of this,
Apple is making significant technology
advances in these areas for Tiger.
And so we thought this session
would be a good opportunity,
almost as a trail guide for all of you,
to help you understand some of the
things that we're doing in this space.
So what we're going to talk
about today is prebinding,
which up until recently has
been the way to get applications
to launch quickly on Mac OS X.
Some of the changes we
made in 10.3.4 and higher,
what we're planning to
do for Tiger for DYLD
How to use dead code stripping.
And then we'll dive down into
wchar_t for the compiler.
So a little bit of a recipe
cookbook type approach here today.
We're going to cover a lot of ground.
So we're going to talk first
about how prebinding works,
and this is to show you
where we've come from.
It also will hopefully give you a
little insight into the workings
of how an application launches,
and it still has some
applicability today as well,
especially if you are still
trying to maintain compatibility
for older OS versions.
What is prebinding?
Prebinding makes
Mach-O applications launch faster.
Mach-O is the native
binary format for Mac OS X.
What prebinding does is it rebases
a binary to a virtual memory
address ahead of launch time.
So your application needs to be somewhere
in the 4-gigabyte address space,
and prebinding says where that goes.
Prebinding can take a
lot of work to get right.
If we start with the
Mach-O binary format,
in addition to all of the
application data and other symbolic
information that goes in there,
the Mach-O binary can contain
links off to other libraries and
frameworks that it links against,
as well as symbolic information
concerning addresses of where the
symbols it needs should be located.
So that when an application is
loaded into a fresh address space,
DYLD checks the binary to see
where it should get loaded.
And by default,
applications get loaded to address 0.
When DYLD loads a library
or other framework that the
application is linked against,
if you don't prebind,
the library will also
have the address of zero,
and thus the library and the
application will collide.
DYLD then has to go through the work of
sliding the library to an available slot.
This takes time.
This has the potential to be slow,
especially if you have a lot
of libraries or frameworks.
Finally,
the application is ready to actually
start running with your code.
So to set up prebinding,
there's a couple things that
we have traditionally done.
Xcode, by default, passes the -prebind
flag down to the linker,
which turns on prebinding when you build.
This is actually why when you,
by default, are linking or building an
application and linking it against
a framework that you've built,
if you don't set things up properly,
the prebinding will be there,
and you'll get conflicting addresses,
and you'll see messages that say
the framework or library overlaps
the text section of the application.
That's because you're trying to
leave them both at address zero.
To remove that conflict,
you would want to set the SEG1 address
flag for the library or framework
to actually specify where in the
4-gigabyte address space the library
or framework should be loaded to.
You're binding it to that
address so that at launch time,
that's where it'll get loaded.
There's a couple things
I commonly use when I'm helping
developers debug prebinding.
VM Map is a command line tool
that will basically give you a
complete dump of the address space.
You can see what system
libraries and frameworks,
as well as your own application
and libraries and frameworks,
are loaded at various
addresses in the address space.
If you're launching
from the command line,
you can use dyld_prebind_debug,
an environment variable,
that will then have the system
spit out some information for
you to indicate whether what
you're launching is prebound.
This sounds complicated.
It is.
It takes a lot of work
of fiddling to get right.
The benefits are that your
application does launch a lot faster.
For a prebound binary,
the application is once
again loaded to address 0.
But when a library is loaded in,
it's already been set up by you to have
a different address that doesn't collide.
So DYLD can just load it up
without having to slide anything.
All the addresses are already correct,
so the application just runs,
and this can be a lot faster.
The advantages of prebinding are
that it works on 10.2 and up.
So if you need your application
to launch quickly on 10.2,
you'd want to still pay
attention to prebinding.
When it works, it works well.
It does give you a large win
in application launch time.
The problem is, as I've discovered,
helping many of you,
is that it's hard to get right.
It's very easy for you to pick an address
that you think works for your frameworks
or libraries that don't actually work.
There's still some overlap.
Or perhaps you pick an
address that works today,
but then your application,
through adding code, grows in size,
and then you bump into
an overlap down the road.
It's hard to keep
everything in sync manually.
And so it's very fragile as well.
As we change things in the system,
perhaps we end up taking up an address
space that you were using before,
and then your application would
not be able to be prebound.
So, we thought hard about this,
and we came up with a new approach.
We've got a better approach now.
And to talk about what we're doing now,
I'd like to invite up Jeff Glasson.
Thanks, Matt.
One of the things I wanted to
add before I get into what we did
in 10.3.4 is that Matt mentioned
the fragility of prebinding,
and one of the things that makes it
fragile is Matt talked about things
growing and shrinking and your
base addresses and your preferred
addresses getting out of sync.
That's not even all in your control.
For example,
Apple could ship a software update that
grows one of the system frameworks.
That would collide with yours,
and then you would have to
generate new preferred addresses.
And so that actually is the source of
a lot of the fragility and a lot of
the pain of very complex third-party
applications that provide a lot of
frameworks that they get linked in.
So let's go and do a
little bit more history.
So we had this problem
where apps launched slow.
We came up with a solution.
It was prebinding.
Very early on,
when we decided that we wanted prebinding
was something that we needed to do,
we did realize that the time that
Matt described of sliding and relocating
and dynamically loading the library
is in fact a bottleneck of app launch.
And prebinding was what we did as a
shortcut to try and precompute some
of that work that the dynamic linker
does when you load things into memory,
as Matt showed in the animations.
So here's some numbers, actually,
just to illustrate the fact of what
prebinding actually does for you
on 10.2 and 10.3.3 and earlier.
This is a very large C++ application with
a large number of private frameworks.
And if you don't prebind that app,
it actually takes 48 seconds to launch.
That's a long time.
This happens to be a
cross-platform application.
And on Linux, the same application
launches in about 15 seconds.
And these are comparable hardware.
One's Intel, obviously.
The other's a G4.
But if you take that 48 seconds and
you actually prebind the application,
that drops down to 12 seconds.
And that's actually an acceptable
launch time for an application
as complex as the one here.
That's actually the time to splash.
So there's a lot of work going on.
So this may be time that
we're spent doing work in the
dynamic loader or time that the
application is initializing itself.
But to go from 48 seconds
to 12 seconds actually is
something that affects end users.
And that is something that a developer
would be encouraged to do work.
So what did we do?
Matt described some of these already.
Prebinding, if you don't prebind on
older versions of Mac OS,
you have slow launch times, most likely.
And the more complicated your application
is with the more dependent frameworks,
the slower that launch time gets.
And that also is coincidentally,
makes it harder for you to keep
all those addresses straight,
and not have overlaps,
and have the prebinding be
determined to be invalid,
and have to be reprebound
dynamically at launch time.
There's a couple other
things about prebinding that
a few of you may care about.
Because we dynamically modify the
application executable at the system,
you may have seen this daemon
called fixed prebinding that
gets started up now and then.
If the dynamic linker detects that
your prebinding is out of date,
it will throw off this daemon to try
and actually fix up the prebinding,
so the next time you
launch that application,
it will launch it.
And it will launch faster.
But what that means is,
you can't sign your code,
because the file is actually
being modified by the
system without your control.
And a lot of you, I think,
care about that.
The other thing that's really
interesting about this is,
I'm sure you guys have
seen during installation,
at the end of installation,
you get this barber pole bar
with an optimizing system.
It takes a long time.
How many of you guys have
gotten bit by minutes of that?
Okay,
so what is going on there is that is
the installer throws off a process
that fixes up the system prebinding.
If you install a new framework,
it's got to go to all the dependent
executables of that framework
and re-prebind that with the
new addresses that are in the
new framework you installed.
So here's an example of,
actually these are kind
of extreme examples.
Keynote is a fairly complex
application with a lot of dependent
frameworks that it installs,
lots of files.
It actually takes 50 seconds
to install on this machine.
And after that, it takes 90 seconds to
re-prebind everything.
That's not too bad.
But something like a security update,
which contains maybe just
the system framework,
takes five seconds for the installer to
actually write the files onto the disk.
And then you're sitting for more than
five minutes while the system fixes
up everything because everything is
dependent on that system framework.
So we'd actually like
to try and reduce that.
Yes.
So we basically just, you know,
solved launch time problems by creating
install time problems for the user.
And that, you know,
may not be that bad because, you know,
you install once.
But, you know,
it's still a painful experience if
you're on an older machine like an iMac
or a PowerBook with a slow disk drive.
And again, it's complex.
So what are we going to do?
Or what have we done?
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to talk about some of the
improvements we made into 10.3.4.
And then later we'll talk
about even more improvements
that we're making into Tiger.
So for 10.3.4,
what we did is we actually wanted
to take a step back and actually
try and understand the real problem
and not the symptoms of the problem.
And the symptoms being slow launch time,
and the real problem being
let's find the hotspots in our
dynamic linker and optimize them.
An interesting point is
we're not the only operating
system that does prebinding.
It goes by various names,
but Linux has a prebinding-like thing,
Windows, Solaris.
They all have something that's
very similar to prebinding.
And what's interesting about the
other operating systems is they
don't see the orders of magnitude
improvement in launch times,
like I showed for that
large application earlier.
They only get about 10 to 20%
better improvement when you prebind.
And it's no easier to prebind on
those other operating systems,
but because it only buys 10 to
20% performance improvement,
most developers choose
not to go that extra,
put that extra amount
of work into the system.
So again,
So what we did is DYLD was
originally designed before large
C++ applications were the norm.
And C++ introduces a number of
complexities into the object file.
There's a greater number of
symbols that are exported.
Templates have interesting
properties that the linker
needs to fix up at runtime.
And so what has happened over the years
since we designed DYLD and then did
prebinding is that the the number of
symbols that have to be fixed up at
launch time has grown significantly.
So, it was time to tune our dynamic
linker for large C++ programs.
So, we took advantage of some tools.
We used Shark.
It's a great tool.
I don't know how many of you
saw the talk right before
this at 3:30 on talk on Shark,
but it's a great tool.
I encourage you to use it as much
as you can to find your hotspots.
And we actually used Shark and
found the hotspots and optimized.
And here's some results.
This is the same application.
I believe it's different hardware.
That's why the numbers are different.
And what this chart shows is actually
split out the time that we're spending
in the system in DYLD versus the time
the application itself is doing work.
So, back on 10.3.3 with an
unprebound application,
the launch time was 80 seconds.
And of that 80 seconds,
72 of those seconds were
DYLD fixing up the relocations.
So, basically, re-prebinding and sliding.
If you prebound that application,
that dropped to 18 seconds,
and only 10 of those seconds was
DYLD actually loading all the libraries.
So, on 10.3.4 with the new
DYLD that we shipped,
we only spent two seconds for
a non-prebound application.
Now, if you look at the size of that
green bar versus the total time,
now that's where Shark comes in.
And now,
since we've sped up our time so much
in the launch of your applications,
you guys really need to dig down
and try and improve the other,
now 80% in this example.
We went from taking 90% to
not a very large percentage,
so time to dig out, Shark.
So basically the take-home message here
is if you only care about deploying
your application on 10.3.4 and later,
you don't need to prebind at all
because you get very little benefit.
And the real important thing here is
now we have fully dynamic launches are
faster than they used to be prebound.
So even if your non-prebound case
is going to be 10 or 20% slower,
which it's not the same anymore,
you still will get some
performance benefits of prebinding.
But we are faster than we used to be
with a fully prebound application.
So with that,
I'd actually like to bring up
Robert Nielsen to talk about
the DYLD that's in Tiger.
In anticipation of DRYMOUTH,
I'll get this started here.
So I don't know how many of you
have had a chance to install
Tiger and a lot of PowerBooks around,
so I see a lot of people
installing things.
We have a brand-new DYLD in Tiger.
Now this is kind of a big undertaking
in that probably next to the kernel,
DYLD is one of the most
fundamental parts of the system.
So as you would expect,
we were very cautious with this.
But given the history of everything that
we've been through and what you've seen,
we felt it was a really
important step to take.
So what do you get with
the new Tiger DYLD?
Well, so it's a new implementation.
I don't think I need to tell anybody
out there in the audience that when you
have solved a problem and it's taken
you 15 years to get to where you are,
being able to reimplement
that from scratch,
you always get it better the second time.
Faster.
We were actually able to address
many algorithmic issues and also
assumptions that were made 15
years ago when the old DYLD was
started that are no longer true now.
More standards compliant,
and we'll drill down on
this a little bit later,
instrumented.
I want this to be a
message that you take home.
If you miss everything else in this talk,
I want you to take this home.
We instrumented the new DYLD on
many axis so that you can actually
measure how long DYLD is taking,
what it's doing,
how much of its time is rebasing,
how much is rebinding.
How much is initialization.
We've instrumented it so you
can actually see all the various
libraries that are loaded,
what causes them to be loaded.
You can now actually look at what
part of the launch process is actually
DYLD's fault and what part is actually
things that you can actually go address.
This is really important.
The old DYLD never had a chance
-- never had a mechanism,
excuse me,
to actually point these things out.
So as a result,
whenever things were slow,
it was always DYLD's fault.
and we are consistent between
prebound and non-prebound.
The old DYLD prebinding again
came later in the process,
and so there were times when
applications behaved differently,
slightly different code paths when
things were prebound or not prebound.
That can be problematic,
as you can imagine.
Okay, new implementation,
better basis for innovation.
What we did was take the old DYLD,
its APIs, and all of the semantics
that were expected out of it,
and we reimplemented that.
We reimplemented that.
We have a much smaller application.
We have a much faster application,
but we have a compatible environment.
And what's really key about that
is it's now a new code base,
smaller, cleaner,
and we will now be able to
actually begin innovating.
One of the things we had to do,
and as Geoff mentioned in his talk,
there's been a lot of language progress
since the UILD had started 15 years ago.
And many of those changes
have to do with C++.
Again, Geoff mentioned templates,
you have template coalescing, etc.
Static initializers,
this is an important one,
we'll drill down on this a little later.
Exceptions and exception coalescing, etc.
So we have been,
we are improved in many regards,
but we really just are now the basis
for where we'll begin to innovate.
So the code paths for dilibs and bundles,
aka plugins, are unified,
and they are in fact the same
paths in almost all cases.
Yeah.
And we've always -- we have actually
struggled with this because people
would sometimes make things bundles
or dilibs based on what their
performance requirements were.
And now you can actually choose
the right tool for the job.
So if you need -- and
the only difference,
by the way, for those of you that
haven't gone down this path,
the only difference between dilibs and
bundles is that bundles do not have
external symbols to which you can link.
So -- and the idea there
is that if you don't have a
linked dependency on something,
you can then unload a bundle.
Currently, we don't have support
for unloading dilibs.
But now you can choose the
right tool for the job.
More compliant.
I tried to stay away from
referring to standards,
but we end up using
the word here anyways,
because standards,
there are industry standards,
there are de facto standards,
and there are ANSI, C++,
ANSI/C standards.
So the former DYLD did what's called
lazy initialization in pursuit of speed.
Again,
this was along the lines of what we were
trying to do to make launch times faster.
So I'm going to back up a little
bit and just talk a little bit
about what's called lazy binding.
We have a concept in
DYLD called lazy pointers.
Lazy pointers are pointers that
you actually have to call through.
They're actually function calls, etc.
They're not accesses to data.
They're not the address of a function.
These are called lazy pointers.
And what we do is we
resolve those lazily.
So if you have 10,000 references to
external symbols in your application,
we don't resolve all of
those at launch time.
We actually wait until you
call through the first time.
You actually pay one time
to have that resolved,
and then every time any place in
your code calls for that same symbol,
that gets resolved.
The idea was, hey, this is a good idea.
Lazy binding saves launch time.
So why don't we take that idea
and apply it to initialization,
do lazy initialization?
The theory was that what we will
do is we will detect when you're
calling a function in a module.
Or in a library.
And we'll say, oh, hey,
we need to actually go now
run the initializer before we
actually resolve your pointer.
That was the theory.
What we discovered was that
wasn't standards compliant.
And there are two standards
we're talking about here.
There is the de facto standard in C,
how all the other environments do it,
how GCC does it on other platforms,
how Microsoft does it,
how Code Warrior does it.
There is an industry standard
on how that was done.
And that was all initializers
get run all the time.
And we didn't do that.
We were trying to be clever and we were
trying not to run initializers when,
in fact, we should have.
And it turns out it wasn't
enough of a speed win.
It turns out that people have over
the years learned that they don't
do really heavyweight things in
their initialization routines.
And, in fact,
trying to add some of the intelligence
to DYLD to deal with the fact
that you are trying to decide
when you can and cannot do things.
Turns out that that logic alone costs
you almost as much as the speed win was.
So the new DYLD is fully
compliant with both the industry,
i.e., de facto standards,
and the C++ standards.
If you take a look at the kind of
history of the language specification,
ANSI C has a standard that says
very little about linking and
nothing about linking of shared
libraries and dynamic libraries.
C++ didn't follow that reign,
and in fact got quite involved
in talking about how symbols
should be linked and things,
and made reference to static
libraries as well as made reference
to dynamic and shared libraries.
And what the standard says is
you will call all initializers
and you will call all finalizers.
Now, it doesn't say when,
so you could theoretically,
just before you exit,
call all of your initializers,
and then call all of your finalizers
and your standards compliant.
So you figure if you have to do that,
you might as well do the initializers
up front and the finalizers at the
end and be standards compliant.
So, whatever,
I guess that's what we should do.
So the new DYLD is compliant in
both the sort of de facto standard,
and that really is in C world,
and in the C++ standard.
This will improve
performance in some places,
and one of the big wins is
it won't require you to do
the bind at launch mechanism,
which I'm afraid many of you had
to do to get all C++ initializers
to run in the old DYLD.
You'd set the bind at launch flag,
and the poor thing would have to go
resolve all symbols so that it would
actually resolve to the initializers,
and that behavior is no longer required.
That's a huge win for
people at launch time.
So there's also some speed improvements
when linking with single module.
So, you know, the old DYLD days,
there was a difference between
multi-module and single module,
and there's some history
that I won't go into,
but one of the benefits
was that you could have
initializers on different modules,
and so it would only
initialize just the module,
which is one part of a library,
and try to do that lazily.
And since now we actually call all
initializers per the standards,
the notion of having multiple
modules is really not an
advantage that you need anymore,
and in fact,
if you go with single module,
in many cases,
you'll actually see an improvement in
performance because the dynamic linker
doesn't have to deal with as much.
So single module is
faster than multi-module,
and if you're using Xcode,
it does the right thing.
Here we go.
This is one of the big ones.
Instrumented.
DYLD is often the least
understood tool in our tool chain.
And I've been thinking about this,
and it really feels like,
to the developer,
it's the absolute end of the chain,
and to the user,
it's the beginning of the chain.
It's actually kind of
neither fish nor fowl,
and it's that boundary
condition in the middle.
And developers don't really kind of,
in large part, realize that this is,
in fact, part of their environment.
It's just doing the
very last bit of work.
So, you know,
so as it's sitting on that boundary,
it doesn't get a lot of attention.
And quite frankly,
the former DYLD didn't have the
instrumentation and didn't give you
any feedback as to what it was doing.
So, to address this,
we've instrumented DYLD,
and we're just getting started.
So what I really want you to
take away is I want you to
actually get back to us and say,
hey, this is great,
but wouldn't it be better
if you did thus and so?
We're just getting started here.
But here are some environment
variables that we have.
For instance,
DYLD ignore pre-binding allows you to
take an app which is fully pre-bound
and actually run it un-pre-bound
and pre-bound next to each other,
side by side.
You set the environment variable.
Its right-hand side of this environment
variable is either all app or split.
I forget the exact syntax.
Please look at the man page on this.
So, in other words,
you can actually see if
your app is not pre-bound,
but everything else is,
or if nothing's pre-bound.
Actually,
you can do side-by-side comparisons to
see if pre-binding is actually worth it.
I bet you'll find out it's not.
DYLD print APIs actually
prints every time you call
through a published DYLD API,
it actually echoes out the API and
the arguments that you've passed in.
DYLD print initializers.
This is a big one.
You actually want to
call print initializers,
so you actually want to see this,
so you can actually make sure not only
your initializers are being called,
they're being called only once,
that they're being called
in the right order.
Initialization order could
be a talk in and of itself.
But print initializers will help you
sort out some of these hairy problems.
Initializers are called pre-main.
Pre-main means many people,
when they get inside GDB,
they say break at main.
How do you break anything before main?
And when these things,
when initializers happen pre-main,
it's often hard to debug these things.
DYLD print libraries shows
you as things are coming in,
what things are being loaded,
what libraries cause what
libraries to be loaded in.
So, if you're trying to figure out under
what circumstances a library gets loaded,
or if you're trying to
figure out what's going on,
you can do that.
You can determine if, for instance,
you're actually loading the debug
or profile version of a library,
this is a way to do it.
DYLD print libraries.
DYLD print statistics,
this is one of our favorite and
probably the first one we added.
This actually allows us to,
we actually do time measurements of
how much time you spent rebasing,
rebinding,
how much time you spent initialization.
There's a sum total that says
how much time was spent in DYLD.
And what we have found on applications,
big applications, is that, you know,
if you're doing a lot of work,
you're going to get a lot of data.
You're going to get a lot of data.
So, big applications, big applications,
you know, big applications that might
take four seconds to launch,
actually 400 milliseconds
is actually spent in DYLD.
So, the problem is no longer DYLD.
Please man DYLD to get this information,
and please give us feedback on this.
One of the goals on the instrumentation,
we actually want to unify the output
grammar to be very consistent,
so those of you who are script writers,
and I'm one of them,
you can write a pretty simple script
to parse the output of these things
and do what you will with them.
So let's talk a little bit about
initialization/finalization.
You're going to hear us
pop back and forth between
initialization/finalization,
construction/destruction.
They have different meanings,
but in this context,
they have very similar meanings.
So I'll see if I can
iron that out for you.
So the history of this
is approaches on C.
Initially,
and many of you who've done any
Unix programming at all have
ever had to deal with this,
in the early days,
there was a magic function
called score_init,
or another one, score_finI,
using the clever mechanisms that
C programmers have of trying to
keep everything to the lowest
possible number of characters.
So that is actually init for
initialization and finI for finalization.
So this is initialization, finalization.
You were allowed to have one of these,
basically one of these per executable.
You can play some tricks with the
linker and have one per library.
But quite frankly, it was very difficult.
It had to be an external symbol.
So you were able to do this.
But if you didn't do it exactly right,
you sometimes found that you
turned off initialization for libc.
That isn't good.
You really need libc to get initialized.
Then in a huge leap of
technological advancement,
somebody said, hey,
let's put it on the command
line and call dash init.
Then you could pass in
the name of the function.
Woo hoo, big improvement there.
By the way, you actually always
want to do this in code.
You don't ever want to do
this on the command line.
[Transcript missing]
and also across modules
and across libraries,
so you can have many of these.
It is a recommendation that you actually
have one of these per translation unit,
and that you actually have other
functions that you call from here.
The standard does say you
can have multiple of these,
and the standard does say that
they will be called in file order.
And in the case of C,
that's a pretty straightforward thing.
However, when you get to C++,
and you start looking at what it means
in C++ to do these kinds of things,
things can get very
confusing very quickly.
So in C++, there was no need to add
a language extension,
because C++ already has mechanism
for static initialization.
If at file scope you say static int,
you know, equals foo, open print,
close print, that, semicolon,
that is in fact static initialization.
That will happen before,
that will happen at that point in
the file as there's translation
unit is being handed off.
That will happen early.
Also, you can create objects,
create them at file scope or, again,
namespace scope,
which is a modified file scope.
And these,
your constructors and destructors will,
in fact, be called.
So they can be tricky in getting
all that stuff right with C++
and trying to depend on the order
within a file beyond the talk,
beyond the scope of this talk.
So please pick up Scott Meyers' book,
Effective C++, item 47.
The fact that it has its own item
number here should tell you something.
So, in summary,
what are the take-home points?
Tiger-DYLD is faster.
It's so fast that
prebinding is not required.
And it's only going to get better.
Conforming C++ static initialization.
We've had a lot.
This was one of the driving forces
behind us going and revisiting DYLD and
actually doing a new one from scratch.
and his team are instrumental in
helping you figure out what it's
doing and what you can do to help
make your launch times faster.
Thank you very much, Jeff Glasson.
Thanks, Robert.
So, I think I wanted to
shift gears a little bit,
and I think what I want to
talk about now is on Monday,
Ted Goldstein, in his keynote,
introduced the feature that we now
are providing dead code stripping
support to our tool chain,
and that's both in Xcode
1.5 and in Xcode 2.0.
We didn't explain much about
what it is and how to use it,
and that's what I'm here for.
So what is dead code stripping?
So dead code stripping is really
something that the static linker does.
It does an analysis of your entire
program and determines symbols
and code segments and data items
that are not referenced at all,
and it just removes them.
It removes them from
the final linked image.
And that saves space.
Certain classes of applications
have more dead code than other.
Macintosh platforms,
the Macintosh tools historically
from other vendors like MetroWorks
have always had dead code stripping,
and the style of programming has been,
let's put, you know,
100 utility functions in one C file,
and if I don't use them,
they'll get thrown away.
The tools that we've been shipping up
to now have come from a Unix background
where the Unix style of programming is,
let's just put everything
in lots of .o files,
and then you've got static archives,
and then dynamic libraries have appeared.
So the dead code stripping
hasn't been as important in the
past for Unix-type applications.
Other things that are interesting
when it comes to dead code stripping
are C++ template instantiations
where the compiler can actually
sometimes generate code that is never
referenced that will reference things
that are not defined in your program,
and that actually causes a link error
if you don't strip that code out.
So we do that now.
So how do you do it?
So there are two command line
options to the static linker now:
-deadstrip,
which enables the feature overall,
and the other one that's actually
kind of important is don't strip
your initializers and finalizers.
What's interesting is initializers and
finalizers are almost never statically
referenced in your application,
and if you don't pass this,
the linker will say, "Hey,
they're not referenced.
I'll throw them away." So please,
if you have initializers that are
static-- or that are not static,
that are exported,
and you do use this flagger,
they will be thrown away if you
turn on dead code stripping.
You don't actually
need to remember those.
I'll go into how to do
this in Xcode in a second,
but dead code stripping
doesn't come for free.
One limitation with what we have
today is you actually need to
rebuild your program and use -g
full if you want debug information.
-g used is an optimization that the
compiler and Xcode uses by default to try
and minimize the amount of debug output.
However, if you don't have full debug
symbols for the static linker to
deal with when it tries to strip,
you may end up with symbols,
debug symbols in your final image that
have no code backing it or vice versa.
You can actually end up with code
that doesn't have debug symbols.
So -g full is important.
-g is not good enough because
-g defaults to g used.
And again,
I'll show you how to do this in Xcode
so you don't have to type stuff on the
command line or type custom options.
It's important to remember that
any symbol that's exported from a
dynamic library is a dynamic library.
It's considered used by default.
This is a good thing.
If you have a global symbol
and it's in a library,
you expect someone to
be able to link to it.
Therefore, it is considered used.
Unused symbols that aren't
referenced statically,
you can actually use another
GCC attribute called attribute
used that tells the compiler,
"This is used.
Please don't throw it away." So,
for example,
if you're trying to use either the
DL compat APIs of DL_SIM or DYLD APIs to
reference that symbol only dynamically,
you need to flag your source
code to tell the compiler,
"Yes,
I want this symbol in my final image."
One other thing you could do is there's
a couple linker flags that let you
deal with symbols in a bulk manner.
There's a feature in, I think,
the Microsoft compiler called DeclSpec.
How many of you guys
are familiar with that,
of specifying whether or not to import
or whether or not to export a symbol?
We don't quite have that yet,
but you can actually specify a
file that you can either say,
"Here's my library.
Here's the list of the only symbols
that I want exported," and then you pass
that with the -exported symbols list,
and then anything else not in that file
will not be exported as a public symbol.
Or you can go the other way and say,
"Here, export everything except these
things because they're really
secret and private." So you have
a choice of how to control that.
You do need to use a new compiler.
There's a new version of GCC 3.3
that comes in Xcode 1.5 that's added
support for tagging these object files
so they can be stripped by the linker.
If you don't recompile your project
with the new compiler and the
linker gets some old object files,
the linker needs to be
conservative and treat those old
object files as a single block,
basically the old Unix semantics.
So if you have 100 functions in
this old object file and it's not
recompiled and you use one of them,
all 100 of those will end
up in your final image.
If you do recompile,
the other ones that aren't
used will be thrown away.
So it's really,
really easy to do this in Xcode.
You may have seen this already
in the preview if you've
installed Xcode 1.5 or Tiger.
There's a couple check boxes
in the target inspector,
and they correspond directly
to the linker options.
There's help underneath that
you can look to make sure
you're doing the right thing,
but check one or both of them
depending on what you want.
And the debug,
also this is in the project inspector.
You need to make sure you set GFUL,
and that's a level of debug symbol.
You can actually do search
in the bottom for GFUL,
and it will do the right thing because
we searched the help text also.
So that's all I have to
say about that for now.
And now I wanted to bring up
Jeff Keating to talk about WHRT,
which kind of is a
little different topic.
Okay, so moving away from linkers
and loaders and such,
In the Panther timeframe,
we introduced wide character support to
GCC and to all of the system libraries.
So wide characters are a
standard part of ISOC and ISOC++.
They were introduced last century.
And in Panther timeframe,
we finally got around to implementing
them completely in both the compiler and
all the way through the system libraries.
So those of you who are familiar with
it will probably know all this already,
but you basically-- instead of
using the character type char,
you use wchar_t.
And instead of strings
and character constants,
you just place an L in front of them
to indicate that you want a wide
string or a wide character constant.
and David Unlike regular strings
or regular character constants,
you're no longer restricted to just
the standard ISOC character sets,
so basically the low half of ASCII.
So you can actually use
characters from other languages,
Japanese, all the accented characters
from all the European languages,
Chinese, they all work in strings.
You can use all of the standard
C and C++ library functionality.
You can print them out using printf.
So here's an example of a
single wide character that
we're printing out using printf.
There's an additional kind of stream
called a wide stream in both C and in
C++ that now works on wide characters,
just as regular streams
work on regular characters.
So you can use all of the C++
functionality to print out wide strings,
to print out wide characters, and so on.
The key feature of wide characters
that makes them different from
what you could kind of do before,
which is just put UTF-8
into a regular string,
is that in a wide string,
each character is just one unit.
So here, for example,
the last bullet item is we have a string
that contains exactly two characters.
You can index that string,
and the first item in the string
is a complete character by itself.
It's not the first byte
of some longer sequence.
So, I should feel obliged to point out,
we have the standard
C and C++ functionality.
This doesn't include anything that,
for instance, draws 20 lines of wide
characters to a screen,
formats it nicely, puts in line breaks,
justifies it on both sides,
remembers which direction to write it in.
We don't have that.
For that, you want to use the Carbon and
Cocoa functionality for doing this.
You know,
you want to put it... And in particular,
you should consider using CFStrings.
CFStrings don't work like this.
They have an encoding that's specialized
for each individual function,
for each individual language and so on.
As a result of that,
the CFStrings will often be more
efficient than using wide strings,
so long as you don't need to do
heavy-duty text processing or any kind
of language-based processing of strings.
Thanks.
So, like most Unix-like systems,
on Darwin we choose to make
wide characters four bytes.
They contain a UCS4
code point from Unicode.
This lets Darwin support all
of the characters in Unicode,
while still maintaining that
property that every character
is one thing in the string.
Some other operating systems decided
to use two bytes for wide characters,
because we'd never have more than
60,000 characters in the world,
and it turned out that
wasn't such a great choice.
With the new extended CJK characters,
we actually need more
than 65,000 characters,
so we need the full four bytes.
and the rest of the team.
So, that was wide characters.
So, I mentioned that you could kind
of do this with regular strings,
with strings made out of char.
The key thing to understand is that the
interpretation of char varies at runtime,
depending on what locale you use.
There's the whole functionality
involving LC char set,
involving set locale,
described in the C and C++ standards.
As a result of this,
if you try to use anything
outside that basic ASCII character
set in a char string,
it may work.
You need to be very
careful about testing.
It may work on your system,
but when someone from a different
country tries to run your software,
they may discover that what
you thought were perfectly fine
Japanese characters turns into strange,
accented characters that make no sense.
The GCC 3.3 compiler,
as shipped in Panther,
kind of expects its input to be in UTF-8,
so you should just go into
Xcode and check the appropriate
drop-down menu item that says,
"My source files are in UTF-8," because
that's really what it's expecting,
and that's what it'll try
to convert to on the output.
We hope to improve on this in GCC 3.5,
but it's not quite there yet.
If you have been using
systems with a 2-byte wchar_t,
and you want to come to
GCC and Xcode and use that,
you might consider using unichar as
a substitute for the actual type,
wchar_t.
To read these from and to disk,
you might want to use the iconv library,
if you say man3 iconv,
which contains functionality
for reading the UCS2 form that
a 2-byte wchar_t really means.
It will do the full
decoding of that form.
It also knows how to decode
virtually every other character
set that you might ever want,
so you should look at that.
Or, if you've decided to
use CFStrings instead,
the right place for that is
to use CFStringCreate from
external representation,
which has basically all
the same functionality.
It lets you basically say,
"I have this sequence of bytes,
and it's in UCS2.
Please turn it into a CF string."
the CFString and it'll just do it.
So now, availability.
I said we got it into Panther, and it is.
The library support is
available in Panther and later.
That means it's not available
in Jaguar or Aurelia.
So a consequence of this is that,
first of all,
if you want to use it in your programs,
you probably really want to be
just targeting Panther or later.
And even if you don't care about
wide characters or other languages,
you should still know that the C++
standard library requires this support.
So if you try to take a C++ program,
you build it on Panther,
and it uses the C++ standard library,
and you then go try to run it on Jaguar,
if you've managed to invoke
some of the parts of the C++
library that expect the support,
it won't work.
So what you should do is if you
wish to build an application
for Jaguar or earlier,
and you wish to do it on a
current operating system,
Panther or later,
you should use the SDK functionality.
This only applies to
C++ and Objective-C++.
It doesn't apply to C.
Okay, so I should now hand
over to Matthew Formica.
Thank you, Geoff.
So what you've seen today is a bunch of
different things that we've been working
on in the low levels of the system,
dynamic and static linkers
and in the compiler.
Launch time improvements are here today,
and they're better than prebinding,
and they're getting even better in Tiger.
DYLD is all new in Tiger.
It adds a whole new level of
standards conformance that I'm
sure will help many of you with
your applications on Mac OS X.
You want to make sure
you know your tool set.
If you have bumped into the concept
of dead code stripping up till now,
we now have it in Xcode,
you'll get different mileage on
different applications depending
on whether your app actually uses
or requires dead code stripping.
And then if you are moving an
application to Mac OS X and it's
been relying on wchar_t on another
platform or another compiler,
you will want to consider
alternatives on Mac OS X,
including unichar and CFString.
There's a variety of
documentation we have available.
Our tools documentation includes
information on dead code stripping
and the support included in that.
I am the tools contact
in Developer Relations.
You can feel free to drop me an
email on tools issues that you have,
or you can send feedback to
xcode-feedback@group.apple.com.